TODO.md, before:

# Todo list
- [x] Write initial version of interpreter
- [x] Write language specification
- [ ] Write documentation for compiler/interpreter/what-cha-ma-call-it
- [ ] Use each element in at least one sample spec
- [ ] Better names/documentation for sample specs
- [ ] Optimize value invalidation for stack control and similar
- [ ] Detangle the mess that is the compiler (i.e. make it not shite)
- [ ] Add multiple levels of verbosity? Perhaps a more detailed printout of internal state?
- [ ] Do some form of testing, besides basic manual tests
- [x] Implement shebang support (i.e. get the compiler to ignore it)
- [ ] Allow stdin to be defined from positional file argument (but not stdout?)
- [x] Add flag for execution without stdin, really only useful with -o or -z
- [ ] Allow arbitrary default values, via --ignore-eof XX, where XX is 2 digits hexadecimal
- [x] BUG: empty spec is an error, but because of index error -- allow empties
- [ ] Add a delay mechanism? (W for wait? $ for sleep? P for pause?) How? Options are read from stack, different delay per side, something else? All executed together between this cycle and next?
- [ ] Implement loop detection during cycle execution
- [ ] Implement memoization during cycle execution
- [ ] Implement iterative calls for polling, rather than recursive
- [x] Add debugging elements (X for examine?)
- [x] BUG: empty lines at beginning of layer are trimmed, only valid if empty on all layers
- [x] Add mirrored adder, perhaps @
- [ ] Add bookmarking/looping, when marker is powered it marks a jump-back point. When unpowered, jumps to that point. Multiple may be used, also, may jump forward if previously jumped back
- [x] Optimization: In case of output suppression S, skip output bit elements, since they become unnecessary
- [ ] Add pulse element, on for first tick, then off after
- [ ] Maybe: Add edge detector(s), on for only one tick when signal changes
- [ ] Maybe: Add queue mode instead of stack
- [ ] Maybe: Add addressed memory instead of stack
- [ ] Add default values that count up from 0x00 instead of a constant value

Commit message:

Add caching element K
chip.py
Update version number

chiplib.py
Update version number
Add caching element K

tools/chipword.py
Fix documentation

tools/chipntimes.py
Script to generate a circuit that runs N times

README.md
Document caching element K

TODO.md
Update and organize todo list

TODO.md, after:

# Todo list
- [x] Write initial version of interpreter
- [x] Write language specification
- [ ] Write documentation for compiler/interpreter/what-cha-ma-call-it
- [ ] Use each element in at least one sample spec
- [ ] Better names/documentation for sample specs
- [ ] Optimize value invalidation for stack control and similar
- [ ] Detangle the mess that is the compiler (i.e. make it not shite)
- [ ] Add multiple levels of verbosity? Perhaps a more detailed printout of internal state?
- [ ] Do some form of testing, besides basic manual tests
- [x] Implement shebang support (i.e. get the compiler to ignore it)
- [ ] Allow stdin to be defined from positional file argument (but not stdout?)
- [x] Add flag for execution without stdin, really only useful with -o or -z
- [ ] Allow arbitrary default values, via --ignore-eof XX, where XX is 2 digits hexadecimal
- [ ] Add default values that count up from 0x00 instead of a constant value
- [ ] Add a delay mechanism? (W for wait? $ for sleep? P for pause?) How? Options are read from stack, different delay per side, something else? All executed together between this cycle and next?
- [ ] Implement loop detection during cycle execution; warn to stdout, and return 0 immediately?
- [ ] Maybe: Implement memoization during cycle execution (can be done manually via cache elements (K))
- [ ] Optimization: Implement iterative calls for polling, rather than recursive
- [x] Add debugging elements (X for examine?)
- [x] Add mirrored adder, perhaps @
- [ ] Add bookmarking/looping, when marker is powered it marks a jump-back point. When unpowered, jumps to that point. Multiple may be used, also, may jump forward if previously jumped back
- [x] Optimization: In case of output suppression S, skip polling output bit elements, since they become unnecessary
- [ ] Add pulse element (!?), on for first tick of execution, then off for all remaining cycles. For init stuff.
- [ ] Maybe: Add edge detector(s) (Nn?), on for only one tick when signal changes
- [ ] Maybe: Add second stack (with unicode numberish elements?)
- [ ] Maybe: Add queue mode instead of stack mode (two queues? queue+stack?)
- [ ] Maybe: Add addressed memory mode instead of stack mode (using second stack elements as addressors?)
- [ ] Add jumpers (jJ?) to connect anywhere within current layer
- [x] Add caching/once-only elements (Kk?) that only poll neighbors once per cycle
- [x] BUG: empty spec is an error, but because of index error -- allow empties
- [x] BUG: empty lines at beginning of layer are trimmed, only valid if empty on all layers
- [ ] BUG: fix wire loop polling; it is highly inefficient, and sometimes incorrect. May be partially solved by general loop detection
